The following is taken from a notice of Orthic
which appeared in the Athenaeum of Oct. 17, 1891.
TROUGH phonetic spelling has usually been adopted byshorthand authors, there is something to be said on the
other side. The task of the learner is simplified when he can
use the spelling with which he is already familiar ; and the shorthand author has fewer characters to provide; Mr Callendar,
who is favourably known as a writer on phonetics and as the
author of a phonetic system of shorthand, has here put forward a system based on common spelling with an alphabet
of twenty-six letters It is pre-eminently simple, and makes
admirable use of the best material afforded by script methods.
...No distinction of thickness is used, backslopes and upright
strokes are practically discarded, linearity is well preserved,
and the writing has an extremely fluent appearance. As
tried by the severe test of full alphabetic writing the result
is remarkably good, and we have found no difficulty in spelling out the specimens given without reference to the key.
Those characters which differ only in size are well distinguished, one being made about three times as large as
the other. Careful attention has been bestowed on the
accommodation of one character to another in joining, and
the connected writing is accordingly more brief than one
would anticipate from a mere inspection of the alphabet. The
system looks as if it would work well and offer few openings
for clashing Mr Callendar must be congratulated on the
great tact and skill with which he has carried out a distinctly
original plan.

SUPPLEMENT
TO THE

MANUAL OF

ORTHIC SHORTHAND
[ORTHOGRAPHIC CURSIVE]
THE CAMBRIDGE SYSTEM.

BY

HUGH L. CALLENDAR, M.A.
ORTHIC PUBLICATIONS.

FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

A Manual of Orthographic Cursive. Price 1s.
A complete exposition of the system containing 12 pp. of
reading practice.
Supplement to the Manual of Orthic. Price 6d.
Containing further illustrations of the methods of abbreviation, and 9 pp. of reading practice for advanced
writers of the system.
The text-books may be ordered through any bookseller or will
be sent post free on remitting prices to the publishers,
C. J. CLAY and SONS, Cambridge University Press
Warehouse, Ave Maria Lane, London, E. C.

London : C. J. CLAY AND SONS,
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE,
AVE MARIA LANE.
1892

Price Sixpence.

PREFACE.
IT is now nearly a year since the publication of Orthographic Cursive. The approval with which it has been
greeted on all sides has more than fulfilled the author's
expectations, and repaid him for the years which he has
spent in the endeavour to devise a system of shorthand
sufficiently simple for general use.
The want of a brief and convenient title for the system
has been very generally felt. It has been decided to adopt
the title of Orthic' in place of the somewhat cumbrous
Orthographic Cursive.'
A society called the Cambridge Shorthand Society,'
has recently been started for the study and propagation
of Orthic. It has been placed under the management of
Mr W. Stevens, of the Commercial and Technical Institute, Ranelagh Road, Ealing, W. Manuscript magazines are, at present, circulated among the members, and
serve to provide practice in reading and writing the
system. It is hoped shortly to publish a magazine
printed in Orthic, and to establish a central school in
London for the benefit of clerks and others who wish to
perfect themselves in the reporting style, and to utilise
the system for business purposes. In the meantime
teaching for various centres can be arranged with Mr
Stevens, the Principal of the Ealing Institute.
H. L. CALLENDAR.
June, 1892.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE MANUAL OF
ORTHIC.

THE object of the following pages is to supply fuller explanation and illustration of the methods of abbreviation given
in the Manual, pp. 30 and 31, and to provide advanced writers
of the system with additional matter for exercise and reading
practice.
Some students appear to think that a phonetic system
must necessarily be briefer and simpler than an orthographic.
Others appreciating the superior simplicity of the orthographic
method are apt to wonder why shorthand was ever made
phonetic. It has therefore been thought necessary to explain
these points more fully for the benefit of those who may not
have read the author's previous publications on the subject.
ADVANTAGES OF THE ORTHOGRAPHIC BASIS.
An Orthography, that is to say a definite standard of
spelling, is the necessary groundwork of any practical system
of writing. It is essential, both for the sake of rapid automatic writing and to secure ease and certainty in reading,
that each word should always be spelt in the same way. In
this way alone can it be written without conscious thought,
and read without hesitation.
The author has insisted on 'this point, and illustrated it
at some length in previous publications, particularly in the

3

Advantages of the Orthographic Basis.

Advantages of the Orthographic Basis.

introduction to the Manual of Cursive Shorthand' (Phonetic).
Every word of that introduction will apply equally to the
present system, except that it is orthographic and not phonetic. The student who wishes thoroughly to master the
principles of Orthic, and to learn how and why it differs from
other systems of shorthand, will find in the introduction to
the Phonetic Manual much that is interesting and instructive,
and that will be of material assistance to him. The proof and
explanation of the above statement, having been already given
therein, need not be repeated here. It is only necessary to
point out its bearing on the question of an orthographic as
opposed to a phonetic basis for shorthand.
Every system of shorthand must in one sense be orthographic. There must be a correct outline for each word.
Every departure from this rule entails a certain loss of efficiency, and a systematic violation of it results in hopeless
confusion.
It is evidently much simpler, if possible, to adopt the commonly received orthography as the basis of spelling for a shorthand system, than to elaborate a new phonetic standard. The
common spelling is already familiar to everyone, and is a
practically perfect standard in point of strictness and uniformity. Phonetic spelling, on the other hand, is to many
people extremely distasteful and difficult to learn. It is,
moreover, even when learnt, an uncertain and unsatisfactory
standard= owing to varieties and changes of pronunciation.
That is the main and decisive point. The simplicity and
definiteness attained by adopting the orthographic basis make
it far preferable for general use to the phonetic. There are
several minor advantages, however, which should not be overlooked.
A phonetic system is quite unable to cope with any peculiarities of spelling, or to give any adequate representation of

proper names. It is also very difficult to adapt to the pronunciation of a foreign language. Orthic, as shown in the
Manual, can be used, almost without change, for writing any
foreign language that is spelt with the common alphabet.
Another very practical advantage of Orthic is that all the
familiar longhand abbreviations can be at once utilised. The
majority of the examples given in the list on pp. 11-13 are
simply transliterations of those in common use, and being
already familiar require no learning.
It is commonly urged in favour of phonetic spelling that so
much is gained in point of shortness by the omission of mute
and silent letters, and by using simple signs for diphthongs
and other compound sounds. This argument as applied to
shorthand is somewhat misleading. All phonetic methods of
abbreviation, such as tho for though, brot for brought etc., in so
far as they are convenient and clear, are naturally utilised in
any orthographic system. Common diphthongs and combinations are also naturally represented by simple curves. The
characters of the orthographic alphabet can also be grouped
on the principle of representing similar sounds by similar
signs, thus securing whatever advantages a phonetic system
may claim in this respect.
From the inventor's point of view, the real advantage of a
phonetic system lies in the fact that it is much easier to construct. The early inventors could not find sufficient material
for their alphabets in the way of characters which would join
easily and clearly. They got out of the difficulty by rejecting
what they called duplicate or superfluous letters, such as c, j,
q, .r, and by omitting all the vowels, or expressing them by
detached marks. This was really only a method of cutting
the Gordian knot, and could not result in the production of
a system adequate and suitable for general use. The comparative ease of constructing a system on this basis is, however, undoubtedly the true explanation of the extraordinary
prevalence of systems of this type.
It is much more difficult to find sufficient stenographic
material for a complete phonetic system, providing joined

2

1

Published by C. J. Clay and Sons, price 2.s.

See A System of Phonetic 'Spelling, pp. 17 and 21, by H. L.
Callendar, published by Clay and Sons, 1889, price 6d.
2

1-2

4

5

Advantages of the Orthographic Basis.

Ordinary Style.

characters for both vowels and consonants. The difficulty of
constructing a complete orthographic system is of the same
kind, but greater, owing to the great number and variety of
different combinations to be provided for.
As early as 1887 the author fully recognised the advantages
of an orthographic basis in point of simplicity, and had made
many unsuccessful attempts to construct such a system ; but
at the time of writing the introduction to the Manual he did
not fully realise the difficulties that phonetic spelling presents
to the majority of students. He was therefore content to
abandon his orthographic labours, and to acquiesce in the
generally prevailing opinion (as expressed in the Manual,
p. 19) that a system of shorthand to be simple, consistent
and complete must be phonetic, since it is almost impossible,
to make a system represent consistently and simply the endless variety of combinations in the common spelling. A correction in the above passage suggested by two or three eminent
shorthand authorities, consisted in striking out the word '
almost'befrip.Thautowevr,ing
length succeeded in solving the problem to his own satisfaction, is now of opinion that he had somewhat over-rated
the impossibility.
Very shortly after the publication of Cursive, it became
evident that the difficulties of the majority of learners were
almost entirely phonetic, that the system was otherwise extremely simple and very easily acquired. The author therefore set to work again in a more systematic way. A most
elaborate analysis was made of the common spelling of
English and several foreign languages. The relative frequencies and modes of occurrence of all the possible combinations of letters were tabulated. By means of this table a
great variety of different methods and arrangements of characters were tested and rejected, or emended and improved.
After about a year of trial and failure an alphabet was at
length evolved, capable of satisfying all the conditions previously laid down.
Subsequent experience of Orthic has served only to confirm

the author's expectations. The testimony of learners is unanimous as to its great simplicity in comparison with any phonetic
system. Teachers and school-masters in particular declare
most strongly in its favour. They find, as might naturally
be expected, that besides being more easily learnt, it has not,
like phonetic systems, any tendency to spoil the learner's
spelling.
Phonetic spelling in itself is undoubtedly a useful educational subject and a valuable aid in teaching correct pronunciation. This argument is often advanced in favour of
phonetic shorthand. But it has been shown that there is
no necessary connection between the two ; and it is manifestly unreasonable to saddle shorthand with unnecessary
difficulties in order to teach at the same time a subject which
many people have no need or desire to learn. In any case the
work of both teacher and learner would be much simplified
by keeping the two subjects separate.
ORDINARY STYLE.
The Ordinary Style of Orthic is intended for general use
and for purposes of correspondence and communication between
different writers of the system. The rules have been made as
simple and definite as possible, so that any word can be correctly written in one way only. It is particularly desirable
that writers should keep as far as possible to the ordinary style
in correspondence, and that they should not introduce reporting abbreviations of their own devising.
Since the publication of the Manual the methods of abbreviation given in pp. 30 and 31, under 'Hints for Reporting,'
have been very thoroughly tested by experienced writers of the
system. Many of these methods have been found to be so
convenient and safe for purposes of correspondence that it has
been decided to admit them into the ordinary style. The
following list contains a fuller explanation and illustration of
the abbreviations which have been thus admitted.
It should be observed that the use of these additional

6

General Method of Abbreviation.

abbreviations is optional. Those who prefer it may continue
to write the full ordinary style as developed in the Manual,
which is quite brief enough for general purposes. But if they
correspond with advanced writers of the system, they must be
prepared to meet with any of the following methods of abbreviation.
Teachers are recommended to instruct their pupils thoroughly in the full ordinary style, before introducing them to the
advanced style developed in this Supplement. They should
also make beginners write between double-ruled lines at first,
as explained in the Manual, § 3, p. 5. This is of great assistance in forming the characters neatly, and in distinguishing
correctly between the two sizes.
GENERAL METHOD OF ABBREVIATION.
The general method of abbreviating Orthic (Manual, p. 17)
is the same as that ordinarily employed in longhand, namely,
to write the first syllable of a word and, if necessary, to indicate the termination by.writing the last letter or two separated
by a small interval from the rest of the word. Experience has
shown that abbreviations made in this way are at once the
most suggestive and the most readily extemporised. The free
use of this simple method of abbreviation is rendered possible
in Orthic by the full expression of vowels in the outlines. In
systems of shorthand which have no adequate means of expressing the vowels, it would obviously be quite inadmissible.
In correspondence, this method of abbreviation must of
course be used with reason and moderation and with due
regard to the context. It should be restricted to very common
words or to words frequently repeated and specially related to
the subject of the letter. In taking notes intended only for
private use, it may be much more freely employed.
Examples of abbreviations for common words such as may
safely be used in correspondence are given in the list on p. 11.
The method of curtailment may be applied to short words as
well as to long ones. In the case of short words containing a

Phraseoraphy.

7

characteristic long vowel or diphthong it is generally best to
keep the vowel (e.g. rea for read, rou for round, cou for count),
but in the case of very common words for which abbreviations
are already current in longhand, it is often better to follow the
longhand usage (e.g. rt for right, mst for most or must, pt for
part, put for point, cd for could). It may be remarked that, as
in longhand, the same abbreviation may in some cases be used
for two or even three different words provided that they are
different parts of speech such as would necessarily be distinguished by the context. Thus hd is used for had and head
and also for the termination -hood, wd for would and world,
mst for most and must, nit for might and for the termination
-ment. In most systems of shorthand this principle is applied,
by the wholesale omission of vowels, to an altogether unwarrantable extent. In Taylor's or Pitman's a single combination
of consonants such as is may stand for any one of twenty or
thirty different words. The principle in itself is good and
reasonable, but we would caution writers of Orthic against the
abuse of it.
PHRASEOGRAPHY.
Time is frequently saved and legibility increased by joining
words together in phrases without lifting the pen. This is a
powerful method of abbreviation in the hands of experienced
writers, and is specially applicable in the case of Orthic owing
to its lineality and facility of joining. Experience has shown,
however, that beginners are apt to run riot with all sorts of
impossible and useless phrases to the great detriment of the
speed and legibility of their writing. The number of possible
and useful phrases is so great that it is impracticable to publish
an exhaustive list showing what phrases may be used in the
ordinary style. The simplest and best general rule for a beginner to follow is not to use phraseography at all in correspondence until he has made himself perfectly familiar with
the system.

8

9

Supra-linear Writing.

Other Prefixes and Slurs.

SUPRA-LINEAR WRITING.

PARA, PERI. These Greek prefixes may also be expressed
by supra-linear writing for the -same reason. Peri is distinguished by retaining the i ; it may be regarded as a special case
of per.
Examples of these prefixes will be found in the list on
pp. 11-13.

This signifies writing a word above the line, out of its
natural position, to indicate the omission of a prefix. It is
a method of great simplicity and power if properly applied.
Initial th as explained in the Manual, p. 15, is already
expressed in this way, supplying clear and systematic abbreviations for a very special class of common words peculiar to
English. It is found, however, that the use of this method
may be very largely extended without any risk of clashing. It
will be observed that all the following applications of the
method are merely special cases of the general method of abbreviation 'by mode' explained on pp. 30 and 31 of the Manual.
EVE. The words every, evening, event, evident, evil, and
their derivatives, are abbreviated by the V-Mode, in the same
way as ever, by omitting the eve and writing the rest of the
word above the line.
Exception :—Even is written e'en, to distinguish it from than
or then.
BE. This prefix is peculiar to a special class of English
words, and may also be expressed by writing above the line.
The word be is expressed by a dot above the line ; been and
being by it and straight -ing ; the former will not be found to
clash with than.
PER-, PRO-, PRE-. These prefixes, being Latin, will not
clash with any of the above English prefixes, and may be
expressed in the same way with great saving of time and space.
Pre- and pro- are distinguished from per, if necessary, by
retaining the vowels e and o. The cases, however, in which
it is necessary to make the distinction are very rare. When
any of these prefixes occur in the middle of a word after another prefix, as in the words unbelief, compromise, etc., they
are expressed by Mode (1), that is to say by writing the
terminal portion of the word close above and to the right of
the initial prefix. In the prefixes super, supra, hyper, the per
is similarly expressed. The allied prefix pri may be expressed
in the same way as pre in some common words.

OTHER PREFIXES AND SLURS.
ACQU, ADJ, are written aqu, aj respectively.
Adv is slurred into one large character compounded of d
and v as explained in the Manual, p. 31. (See list, p. 11.)
Con, Cox, are expressed by a dot on the line written close in
front of the word, as explained in the Manual, p. 30. In
taking notes the dot may generally be omitted or expressed by
Mode (2). In correspondence it should be retained.
In compound prefixes, such as imam-, discern-, etc., the
cant- or con- is expressed by Mode (2).
Circum is written cir followed by a short break to express
the cum. Circe is the regular longhand abbreviation for the
word circumstance.
MAGNA, MAGNI, are written in, the rest of the word being
placed below to indicate the g. (Mode (3), Manual, p. 31.)
MB may be written with a single character somewhat like
mp, but beginning and ending on the line. (See list, p. 12.)
Mrs- is written ins, omitting the i.
NCH, SCE. These combinations may be written without an
angle or break. (See inch, such, school, in the list, p. 12.)
Ten. The t may always be omitted in this combination.
TRANS is written trs, as in longhand.
TERMINATIONS.
In accordance with the general method terminations are indicated by writing the last letter or two detached from the rest
of the word. Thus the common terminations -ent, -ence, -ency,
1-5

10

Examples of Abbreviations.

Examples of Abbreviations.

-m, -p,
-graph, -ism, -ship, -wise, are written -t, -ce, -cy,
-se respectively. (See list, p. 11.)
NESS. This termination should be written -ess detached,
by the general rule, and not ns as given in the Manual, p. 16.
Detached is and as can then be used, as in longhand, for the
expression of the common terminations -ation and -ations.
VE, -Iva. This common termination is expressed by a dot
above and to the right of the word to indicate the v. (Mode (1),
Manual, p. 31,) When the word is inflected the last letter of
the inflection is substituted for the dot. (See gives, given, selves,
etc. in the list, p. 11.)
GE, -DGE, -AGE, and derived terminations are similarly
expressed by a dot below and to the right to indicate the g.
(Mode (3), Manual, p. 31. See also knowledge, agent, etc. in
the list, p. 11.)
GN,RAMareindctbys peivlwrtn
below (Mode (3)) to indicate the g, as in the termination
- ight. (See foreign, sign, in the list, p. 1L)

EXAMPLES OF ABBREVIATIONS.
The following list of abbreviations contains examples of all
the preceding methods. They are collected together and
arranged alphabetically in order to facilitate reference.
Derivatives of words given in the list are abbreviated in
the same way as the primitives from which they are derived.
For instance in the words former and formal the first syllable
is written in the same way as the word form; the prefix for in
forgive is written in the same way as the word for; party and
particular are abbreviated in the same way as the word part.
In the words come and same the final e is omitted to distinguish
them from came and same. The attention of the student is
particularly directed to the abbreviations for the words much
(Inch), such (sat), and next (nst), which are new.

sit

11

12

Examples of Abbreviations.

Examples of Abbreviations.

Si

-

;AK_

nxaa

,

G.4

13

c

-

Ordinary Style, Abbreviated (Key, pp. 3 and 4). 1,75

14 Ordinary Style, Abbreviated (Key, pp. 1 and 2).

- —

C"

--0 -4, •

"\_1

-

, 4 —
A4 A"

_-

,

44 •
C-,

o'.

//- / 3

y„.;)

—

)--,"

• P w ,•∎

r e'

e"r

.4C—

C 1 ° ---

-- L _ _

‘rt' ,

—

,A4.

jr-4 1-

r

4 ic

20 7 's,

6, 7.7 ,

-0

cre

— 6- .

S

6

a' — o r ...AP 2 —ED

e9

-

—

2, /if

0.9• , — —

4—,
• • • (.7"<-• •

,

_ _ __pcl _

)

li

•
3 e-•

-

_ rs 6r
4.1

J.

A,4

-

/4-ss

Ey—f,

•-• er • ••••-,

-

e' 0 , - '7 .

5_4/4

•

2„„

0

4•

-6-6 9 - o

•
-

6/"2^

u

u

)„ ?

A

-

9( er

• —

A. '
—

r 4 °i •
co./. —LI
tr"--ecam, V•••• ✓

—

.

N../ 3

cr?

Notes on Reporting.

f6 Ordinary Style, Abbreviated (Key, pp. 4 and 5).

--- 3 r-^'

r-4-f

•

Q_o" \

0, 4-- , 4

— _7

oC2-,.
U

6,,, -3

,

4-d(2^

9-• —
•

°I. '9 -6-2. (-4,

3 C.,-

._

-^ C
7,/ 3.,
•

afs

,e
47

)

,

-fCv"),

(-

,

—

Z--,

.

— CP
r

)"../

9 6,L-0
4

VON.,

r' 1 ° —

--'

•

7-a"4"")7

Cir
3

fr-Y

ofr' -0

-

Q„.

6 . r

--e9< cv`.--" 3 6-‘

-ocr

•

- 3 1-./

eA a. -7

L-7

A-f

Cc 94' 6.—

c— V Er^
-Lpr

—

_
•,,5), y. '

13m

r fr., 1 .
CL„

"

c_fc,

L._ 7"

17

18
*

r

„

• g

(-;"/.' 8 . 4 4 r•-...34c.

=c

2

r

"t •

r

.

2

Pe.

" —

-7

,

•

&

0_,/ A-

•

Q.-,

–

,

,

=

'

4-4

S

)
• •-• •)•• • •

19

-Votes on Reporting.

Notes on Reporting.

=

-r 4

-

i- 677

,

4:1;

1-=
Cl

—

•-49 3, =

'-'

s

4A/".

c-fc, -g

at, —

—

_ t

=
r

E

= •• , p = (-(R, , =
_6, L.
-

d.-"F C^

9—cc,. • r,

=

=

2

=

,
= ,..••••A

=

.

O's

,v 6imp,def

•-• 0.-j "---4 •
!L:

;

=

Key to p. 20.

..'Votes of a Speech.

20

p

-

,Q-

G.L. 6 4,

-

r ,
N

w

-7 r-2

/' 2

cs 3

2r.)
/e."

L ,y
T'

-

e ..

r <r_ - v

ace.,
? __

•-)
-k<-0

o' "on (y.,

.4' ,

-

LORD DUFFERIN AT ST ANDREWS.

(.• -, s-J •

cs2--

o

--

r

,

-G-

-7

° ci„

21

-

,,_
2

c1 ,

The RECTOR, who was received with cheers, said that he had
determined that the best return he could make to those who
had shown him so much kindness, but to whom he knew he
was incompetent to communicate anything worth their attention, in regard either to science or letters, would be to give
them, in as simple and unpretending a manner as he could,
such practical hints in regard to some few of the matters which
would affect their start in life as his own personal experience
might furnish. The first piece of advice, then, that he would
give was to endeavour to reach a practical conception both of
the length and of the shortness of life ; he urged upon them to
get clearly into their heads the fact that life is a definite circumscribed period of time, sufficiently long to get a great deal
done in it, and yet not long enough to oppress them with the
idea of exhausting and unending effort. He asked them, in
the next place, to try and frame for themselves beforehand as
clear and correct a conception as circumstances might permit
of the natural incidence, and ultimate conditions of whatever
careers they were determined to follow, being careful at the
same time, before they chose their profession, to get a right
knowledge of their individual aptitudes, and of the extent of
their powers, for he was convinced that their usefulness, as
well as their happiness, depended upon their work being done
in a congenial atmosphere ; and that it was much better to
choose a humbler, less promising, or less remunerative walk
in life, in which they were certain of personal satisfaction,
than to commit themselves to a more ambitious employment
which might, perhaps, prove distressing to their tastes and
unsuited to their faculties. He impressed upon them strongly
the necessity of attending to their health, maintaining that the
healthiness and robustness of their nerves and mental fibre
were as worthy of cultivation as those of their corporeal
faculties. In that way they would keep themselves free from
those morbid, sentimental, and vicious growths which left a
human being neither man nor woman. Regarding the acquisition of languages, he was inclined to range himself on the
side of those who would retain not only Latin but also Greek
as an essential part of the education of every gentleman. Nay,
if one were to be compulsorily admitted, he would prefer dropping Latin rather than Greek, for the literature of Greece had
been the quarry out of which the brightest gems in the writings
of their modern authors had been extracted. He adverted to the
necessity of their acquiring a knowledge of, at all events, one
modern European language, and there could not be any doubt that
that language should be French, for not only was its literature the
.

CV -,

• -„

,

22

Key to p. 22.

Yotes of a Speech.

s

-

oC-P

- C

o

r

2

----

a"-Q-4

9---

1■

1

'-'4 — 3 --- 5

.

CL,

_ r

_
6, 7 07,
tV" "

v.z

or.) -

e 3 1,

-) — -

•Ir'i

v

D---) a 5'

.

Of

23

most diverse and admirable possessed by any European community except their own, but it had long been accepted as the
common channel of communication between European nations.
But far more important than the acquisition of any foreign
tongue was the art of skilfully handling their own. Already
Providence had issued its decree that English should be the
predominant language of the globe—in other words, the man
who wrote a good book, or made a good speech in English,
would command for all time what was already the greatest
audience known to history, and which eventually would cover
the better part of three of the five continents of the world.
There was one golden rule which he would venture to insist
upon—namely, that in the first place, before putting pen to
paper, they should compel their own mind to hammer out an
absolUtely clear and distinct conception of the thought they
wished to express, and that then they should put it into the
simplest and least Latinised words that came to hand, without
giving a thought to what was called style, and confining their
attention to the attainment of only two objects—conciseness
and lucidity. There was one other useful rule which he would
also recommend to all young writers, no matter what might
be the nature of their composition, whether books, speeches,
sermons, lectures, or addresses—namely, that after they had
written them they should cut them down by about one-third.
Probably there were few hooks, still fewer sermons, and certainly no speeches, that had ever been produced or delivered
which would not have been much improved by being considerably curtailed. With regard to public speaking, the first essential principle was undoubtedly practice. He had often
heard experienced members of the House of Commons remark
on the extraordinary improvement which practice had produced amongst those whom necessary circumstances or their
own courage and ambition had induced to persevere in imposing themselves upon a long-suffering audience. He adverted to their writing an extempore speech beforehand, and
said they should not send it to the reporters, before it had been
delivered, as once was done by an acquaintance of his, who,
after all, never got an opportunity of speaking. His Lordship
concluded by mentioning two further rules of conduct—namely,
the cultivation of the spirit of justice, and, of the sentiment of
chivalry. The secret of lifelong happiness was not, as was
generally said, to keep one's illusions as long as possible, but
to preserve the conviction that one's " illusions " were the only
realities, and that their destruction was tantamount to their
becoming the victims of a vain and empty dream. But with
knightly purity and white-robed justice for their companions,
the magic light would neither waver nor fade from their path.

24

Verbatim Report of a Speech.

Key to Reporting Style on p. 24.

o•-_,

,

e--

r

.

a

—

e-

C

,4,-

e

6

LtIC.

c).?( . c-°(

o,

—

— 14.
•

.

0- P-

p- 1".

I r\s.
•ir

-

3 _3g

-

CAMBRIDGE: PRINTED BY G J. CLAY, M.A. AND SONS, AT TIER UNIVERSITY PRESS.

LORD SALISBURY AT THE MANSION HOUSE.
My Lord Mayor, my noble colleague challenged me to tell
you what were the changes of policy of her Majesty's Government. Well, we are to meet in Cabinet to-morrow, and of
course I shall have the opportunity of explaining them to him
more distinctly when we meet. But I may tell you that my
task will be an easy one, because they are represented by zero.
There are no changes in the policy of her Majesty's Government. We are quite satisfied with the result of our policy in
Ireland. And we think that the statesman who has been principally associated with that policy, Mr Arthur Balfour, may
retire from the immediate supervision of it with a consciousness of the best bit of four years' work that has ever been done
by a statesman. And I am bound to say that what we have
recently seen in Ireland has not altered our opinion. What we
have seen has not made us think that a domestic legislature in
Ireland will be distinguished by peace or order, or an abstinence from blackthorn, or a freedom from the curse of ecclesiastical domination. Therefore I have to reply to my noble
friend that I see no reason to chance our policy with respect to
Ireland. With respect to our foreign affairs, there is always a
certain difficulty and responsibility, because the speaker is apt
to be suspected of intending to assume the mantle of a prophet.
I desire entirely to disclaim that intention. We have had a
good deal of prophecy of late—they call it meteorology. We
are told of things that are certainly to happen in a year's time.
Well, I am not here to discuss those prophecies, but I think
confident predictions when they are to the advantage of the
predictor are sometimes a mistake, for fortune is fond of
flouting such confidence. But, at all events, whatever we
may think of domestic affairs, with respect to Foreign affairs
I will speak only of the present what I know ; and with respect
to the present I will say that there is not on the horizon a
single speck of a cloud which contains within it anything
injurious to the prospects of peace. In fact, it seems to me
that the warfare of nations, if you are to judge by the interest
they take in the subject, is slowly changing its object and its
field, and that it is the industrial competition which chiefly
occupies in these days the chancellaries and diplomacies. The
great subjects of consideration are those Treaties of Commerce
which are to expire next year ; the great question is what tariffs
will the various nations adopt with regard to each other. And
though, with respect to material warfare, I think we can hold
out to you the most promising anticipations, as far as our
present prospects go, with respect to this industrial warfare,
which has for its weapons protective legislation, and has for its
prize the markets of various countries, I am afraid we must be
content to occupy for a time a peculiar and isolated position.

